###### tags: `System Software` `CISC` `x86`

<style>
    font {
        color: red;
        font-weight: bold;
    }
</style>

# x86 Architecture

## Memory
- At the **physical level**, memory consists of 8-bit bytes.
- Byte addresses.
- **Word**: 2 consecutive bytes
- **Double-word (dword)**: 4 bytes

Some operations are more efficient when operands are aligned in a particular way. However, programmers usually view the x86 memory as a collection of <font>segments</font>.
- From this point of view, an **address** consists of two parts
    - a **segment number**
    - an **offset** that points to a byte within the segment.
- Segments can be of **different sizes**, and are often used for different purposes.
    - For example, **code segment** and **data segment**.
- It is not necessary for all of the segments used by a program to be in physical memory.
- A segment can also be **divided into pages**.

## Registers
:::danger
- Each **general-purpose register** is **32 bits** long.
- **EIP: program counter**
- **FLAGS**
- **16-bit segment registers**:
    - ***CS* for code segment**
    - **SS for stack segment**
    - ***DS*, *ES*, *FS*, *GS* for data segments**
- **Floating-point unit (FPU)** contains eight **80-bit** data registers.
- There are also a number of registers that are **used only by system programs** such as the operating system.
:::

## Data Formats

- Integers, floating-point values, characters, and **strings**.
- The least significant part of a numeric value is stored at the lowest-numbered address: <font>little-endian</font>.
- Unpacked and packed **BCD formats**.
- ==Three different floating-point data formats:==
    - **single-precision** with **32 bits (24+7+1)**
    - **double-precision** with **64 bits (53+10+1)**
    - **extended-precision** with **80 bits (64+15+1)**

## Instruction Formats

- **Prefix**: containing **flags** that **modify the operation** of the instruction.
    - For example, a repetition count of the instruction (e.g. string manipulation), specifying a segment register.
- **opcode**: 1 or 2 bytes. Some operations have different opcodes, each specifying a different variant of the operation.
- A number of bytes that specify the **operands** and **addressing modes** to be used.
- The **opcode** is the only element that is <font>always present</font> in every instruction.

## Addressing Modes
- **Immediate mode:** data in the instruction
- **Register mode:** data in register
- **Direct mode:** address of data in the instruction
- **Relative mode:** displacement in the instruction, relative to EIP
    - **TA=(base register) + (index register)*(scale factor) + displacement**

## Instruction Set

- More than 400 machine instructions.
- An instruction may have **0~3 operands**.
- There are:
    - **register-to-register** instructions
    - **register-to-memory** instructions
    - **memory-to-memory** instructions
- Some **special-purpose instructions** to perform operations **frequently required in high-level programming languages**
    - For example, entering and leaving procedures and checking subscript values against the bounds of an array.

## I/O

- Repetition prefixes allow I/O instructions to transfer an entire string in a single operation.